From PMI to Bots
(and back to sampling)

The Lexicographer, Patrick Hanks, and I introduced pointwise mutual
information (PMI) when we were reviving 1950s-style empirical methods
in 1990s.  PMI connected a number of interdisciplinary dots between
Psychology, Information Theory and Lexicography.  This talk will
connect some more dots between PMI and much of the recent excitement
in Artificial Intelligence (AI) involving Large Language Models
(LLMs).

Chatbots encode language, pictures, audio, video and more as vectors
and then use approximate nearest neighbors (ANN) to respond to
prompts.  ANN inputs a query and returns nearby vectors in a database
of vectors (embedding).  Indexing for ANN often starts by compressing
the vector database using methods such as Product-Quantization (PQ).
Dimension reduction with SVD has more history than PQ, and is better
understood.  Vector databases tend to be tall-skinny; that is, there
are many more rows than columns.

This talk will introduce a batching approximation to SVD for
tall-skinny matrices.  Batching makes it possible to estimate SVD of
large vector databases with surprisingly little memory, important for
streaming and embarrassingly parallel applications.

The talk will end with a discussion of sampling.  The SVD
approximation suggests that sampling is ``all we need'' to estimate
singular values.  Similarly, benchmarking can be viewed as a sampling
method to estimate performance on a larger population of interest.  One
risk with sampling, however, is the tendency to ignore important
minority cases.


Bio

Kenneth Church works on large language models (LLMs). He was an early
advocate of empirical methods and a founder of the Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP).  He
currently works for VecML, a small start-up company founded by Ping
Li, a former intern that has been working on his intern project for 20
years.  Ken has taught at Northeastern and Hopkins.  He has also
worked in industry at AT&T Bell Labs, Microsoft, IBM and Baidu, the
largest search company in China.  Ken received his undergraduate and
graduate degrees from MIT in ``course 6'' (Artificial Intelligence).
Honors: Fellow of AT&T, Baidu, ACL and ACM.

Home page: https://kwchurch.github.io/
